URL Slug: www.fieldservicely.com/gps-tracking

Title: What Is GPS Tracking? A Must Have for Field Services!

Feature Image:

Alt: GPS tracking in a smartphone with wrench and construction tools, highlighting the importance of GPS tracking

Meta

Learn what GPS tracking is, how it works, and how field service teams use it for accountability & maximum ROI!

What is GPS Tracking? A Must-Have In Businesses!

It’s a common trope for people to associate GPS tracking with police investigations or movies! But did you know that tracking tech has become really popular in most businesses now?

Yes, you heard that right. And it’s even more prevalent in field services like plumbing and construction. So, if you don’t know about GPS tracking yet, it’s the perfect time.

Let me guide you to the interesting facts about tracking with GPS and how it can help you!

Key Takeaways

● GPS tracking is a system where the user can monitor and track others or an asset’s live location

● GPS trackers can have many forms, the most popular ones being vehicle trackers and smartphone apps.

● GPS tracking is legal in most US states, depending on the usage.

Table of Contents

● What is GPS Tracking?

● What is a GPS Tracker?

● How Does GPS Tracking Help Businesses?

● What are the Limitations of GPS Tracking?

● Is GPS Tracking Legal?

● How to Implement GPS Tracking Safely?

● Final Words

● FAQs

What is GPS Tracking?

GPS tracking is a system that uses a tracking device or software to locate a person's or an asset’s location. If you already know what GPS (Global Positioning System) is, then I believe it’s easy for you to understand how the tracking works.

The GPS devices use the Global Navigation Satellite System for location triangulation. Complex Satellite Navigation (satnav) communication and GPS signals are constantly shared from the GPS receivers on the tracking devices.

Image:

Alt: How GPS tracking devices work with Satellite Navigation and the Earth

GPS satellite signals communicate with the GPS-enabled device, and a user can access the location data on another device. Essentially, anyone can use Real-time GPS tracking for personal or commercial use, provided they have permission.

Yes, GPS technology is not a complex tech that you can’t use.

It’s crucial to understand how GPS location tracking works because otherwise you won’t understand when it doesn’t! Because GPS tracking is not always accurate, and you’ll find out why soon!

Interesting Read: How accurate is GPS tracking?

What is a GPS Tracker?

GPS trackers are portable or software-based GPS tracking systems that allow users to monitor real-time location data. The tracking device involves a GPS receiver, a screen, and a bunch of electrical components.

So, what is GPS tracking used for?

These are popularly used as vehicle tracking systems for fleet management and asset tracking.

Apart from vehicle tracking devices, GPS tracking software has become quite popular too. As more people are introduced to smartphone GPS technology, smartphone app GPS tracking has become easy to use.

Image:

Alt: multiple GPS trackers with a smartphone GPS tracking app

Whether it’s for your kids, old-age parents, or pets, GPS tracking can be useful on multiple occasions.

There are different types of tracking systems. Here are some notable ones:

● Smartphone app-based GPS tracker: Very easy to download and use. Suitable for both personal and commercial use cases.

● Hard-wired vehicle GPS tracker: Connects directly to vehicles using onboard diagnostics (OBD-II) or other connectors. It can be both an active GPS tracker and a passive GPS tracker.

● Personal GPS tracker: For kids, seniors, or belongings.

If you don’t know the difference between Active GPS and passive GPS, here you go:

● Active GPS: Active trackers monitor you in real-time and offer remote monitoring.

● Passive GPS: Passive trackers store the GPS and location tracking data and let it be viewed afterward.

Now, let’s summarize the actual benefits of GPS tracking:

● Real-time location monitoring and activity tracking

● Geo-fencing and real-time notification

● Improved customer success

● Enhanced productivity and reduced time loss

● Asset tracking and safety

● Route planning and route optimization for fleet management businesses

How Does GPS Tracking Help Businesses?

Okay, it’s one thing that GPS tracking is beneficial. But what are the actual areas where it can work for businesses?

Image:

Alt: How GPS tracking is helping businesses with asset management & route optimization

There are plenty of ways to use tracking tech in your business. Whether you’re a field service manager or fleet manager, there are multiple ways to integrate GPS!

• Real-time Vehicle Tracking: You can’t even imagine how relieved you’ll feel when you know exactly where your vehicle is!

• Live Technician Visibility: You’ll be able to see the availability of your technician or plumber at a glance. Then, you’ll get the maximum output by quickly dispatching them to the nearest job.

• GPS Fleet Tracking: Track and monitor your whole fleet with GPS-enabled devices and fleet management software.

• Geofencing Clock-ins: Know exactly when your workers are clocking in accurately with geofenced targeting.

• Near-perfect ETAs: Boost your delivery and improve your ETAs for better customer reviews.

Want to know how geofencing works? Get a Live Demo with Fieldservicely!

What are the Limitations of GPS Tracking?

As you can already understand, GPS tracking relies heavily on the GPS signals. So, any interference with the Global Navigation Satellite System can severely hamper the GPS tracking accuracy.

Furthermore, most entry-level smartphone app GPS trackers have okayish GPS receivers. As a result, the GPS device accuracy can go off sometimes. Additionally, excessive battery drain can be fatal for those who work in a remote area.

Similar Read: Does location sharing drain battery?

Another drawback of GPS tracking is the dependency on cellular data or Wi-Fi. While GPS does not really require mobile data, most smartphones require data for real-time monitoring. If you’re planning to cut down on the data costs, standalone GPS-enabled devices will be the perfect fit for you.

For the legality aspect, we will now get into the nitty-gritty details!

Is GPS Tracking Legal?

Contrary to popular beliefs, tracking is actually legal in most scenarios. Yes, there are some rulings where GPS tracking becomes completely illegal, but those are not regular situations. Let me break it down to you.

Image:

Alt: United States map showing with GPS tracking symbols and a scale that represents GPS laws

The Fourth Amendment protects individuals and businesses from unreasonable searches and seizures. With the Amendment, civilians are protected from GPS tracking without consent or a warrant.

Again, there are many categories or use cases of GPS tracking that are not illegal. Here are some of them:

● Employers can track employees for company-owned asset or vehicle security

● Legal enforcers can track potential suspects with a warrant

● Parents can track and monitor their children's safety

So, if you’re an employer, then you have the authority to track and protect your assets. However, there are some instances where it becomes illegal:

● GPS device installation on an employee’s vehicle or device without consent.

● Tracking on an individual’s device, vehicle, or estate without permission.

So, without making a proper plan to integrate GPS tracking, you’re sure to face issues. That’s why I’ll walk you through how you can safely implement GPS tracking technology in your business.

How to Implement GPS Tracking Safely?

The first thing is to get a clear idea of what capacity you’ll be using for GPS tracking. Obviously enough, get a lawyer or go through the state laws in the U.S. For example, employee tracking is restricted in Alabama. So, make sure you have the right information about US tracking laws!

Depending on your needs, you might need to get a separate GPS-enabled device. If not, you can make do with smartphone GPS apps.

Then, you should properly communicate the usage of the GPS trackers with your employees, workers, or stakeholders. After that, set proper rules and policies for tracking hours, data usage, and personal privacy.

You should be very careful because if you don’t have a proper policy, there can be fines or worse, lawsuits!

Finally, start integrating and get those powerful insights about your workforce! You’ll be amazed to see the changes within months!

Final Words

GPS tracking has become very crucial to many businesses. Even in your personal life, GPS trackers are everywhere! So, there’s no point in shying away from adopting this useful GPS technology in your business or everyday needs.

FAQs

Can a cell phone detect a GPS tracker?

Yes, your phone can detect some GPS trackers, but not all of them. There are many personal GPS trackers that can’t be detected with a smartphone app.

What does a GPS tracker look like?

A GPS tracker can come in multiple shapes, but the most popular shape is rectangular. Some recent GPS trackers like AirTag have round shapes.

What is phone GPS tracking?

Phone GPS tracking is the method of using a tracking app to track a user’s location.

What is GPS asset tracking?

GPS asset tracking is a system that includes battery-powered GPS devices for physical assets for real-time monitoring.

What is GPS vehicle tracking?

GPS vehicle tracking is a tracking system that allows a user to track live location and GPS data via a GPS device.

Is GPS tracking in vehicles legal?

Yes, with proper rules and policy implementation, any business can track its fleet and vehicles. However, be extremely careful as there can be serious legal consequences.